ABOUT THE KERMO

The Kermo is a complete software engine for faithfully rendering to the screen mostly geometric images in an R^3
Cartesian space, from any given angle and orientation.
In other words, it's a 3D graphics engine emulator, which I conceived and wrote entirely from scratch in Java. 
The Kermo implements ray-tracing.

1. SOME HISTORY (You can skip this part)


I started writing code for the Kermo about 2 years ago, before I knew any Precalculus (which is to say, long after I'd forgotten 
virtually all the math I learned in high school); I thought that I could have finished and gotten the app
working without systematically studying any linear algebra, simply by translittering into code some of the math like
the Rodriguez algorithm which I couldn't prove and simply had to pull from online, but I finished Ron Larson's 
Elementary Linear Algebra 8th Edition in a couple of weeks anyway because I wanted to understand why things like rotation matrices 
did what they were purported to do. This of course turned out not to be the case, and even if there were a way to implement the ray-casting loop using only vector-about-vector rotations, it would have been excruciatingly slow, inelegant, and without the facility to implement texture mapping. ( See : Kermo - Ray Casting.txt )
 
It was very important to me throughout the project to prove as much as I could on my own, to study as little as possible, to not look at the book on graphics I had or look at the Quake engine in Visual Studio or at online graphics engines, or read about graphics on Wikipedia, or look at anything that any other programmer
had written (or even really talk to other programmers, but I'm done with that way of being now).  Instead, I wanted to get as much code working as possible from what little information that I already had 
(I got simple rotations of vectors and triangles about the axes to work using only trigonometry, which I'm weirdly proud of;
See VectorsLinesTriangles.java, which is as far as I got before cracking down on linear algebra).

I have not been affiliated with any school or professional program (I've also been homeless for the past 10 months).
 
In that sense, the project is indeed a personal one, representing my own 2-year meditation and enquiry on how the 
beautiful CGI you see in movies and video games and art is able to do what it does. ***NOTHING WHATSOEVER IS PLAGIARIZED ***

Initially I barely studied. My main strategy for the first year was simply to play and watch more video games while thinking
about graphics, and occasionally writing some code down for maybe an hour or 2 a week while working on other projects (and 
getting high). I didn't even know about ray-tracing; I thought I'd be dealing with a frustrum and scaling color distances
by the slopes of the frustrum's sides (all of which would have actually required much more, and more sophisticated, math than what
I needed to learn in general, which of course ended up being a lot). But, somewhere down the line I learned what ray tracing was,
and (again, without actually studying ray tracing algorithms) in the break room of the UPS warehouse I worked out pseudocode 
for a basic ray-tracing algorithm and wrote EngineApp_EARLY_LOGIC.java, which is probably where the project began in earnest. 

By then I had taken the time to systematically relearn precalculus and the derivative, learn a few physics fundamentals, 
and read up to chapter 2 of Larson whereupon I knew about row-reducing a matrix to solve a linear system (this will become relevant 
later); doing so either because I had arbitrarily forced myself to, thinking it was a necessary part of a computer science 
and programming education, or from intuitions about the universal significance of what I was studying, or, in the case
of for example learning about vectors in Physics for the first time, I just thought they were neat and fun in esoteric sorts of ways.

Regardless, after doing so many mindless arithmetic problems in textbooks, I realized, and this became my
attitude for most of the rest of the project, that math should be ancillary. You shouldn't have to worry about filling your head 
with inapplicable theorems and equations if you're trying to do something specific, and you should only learn the equations
that will be your tools and enable you to do what you're trying to do (given especially that all math works in fundamentally the
same way through the same operation of addition/subtraction, and is all internally consistent; not to mention the Turing Machine, 
syntax, etc.). For example, when I realized that you couldn't use matrix reduction to solve a system of 3 linear equations in 2 
variables representing a line in 3 dimensions and 1 linear equation in 3 variables representing a plane (such a system is 
overdetermined), I went online and learned about the vector forms of the line and the plane in 3d, concepts from 3rd semester 
calculus even though my own calculus barely extended beyond the limit and the derivative, and was thereby able to find the 
intersection logic for a line and a plane with relative ease. The same thing happened for the Law of Cosines (math which I never 
thought I'd need) and the withinVertices logic for ray-polygon intersection (See : WithinVerticesTest.java); my point is that I'd 
always try to reason through the problems on my own, and if I realized that there was math I needed and didn't have (and didn't have time to prove or discover on my own without starving to death while doing so; we really owe much to the sacrifice and back-breaking work done by generations of mathematicians to flesh out these wonderful systems), then I'd go online or into books and learn it. 

Also, you don't really need to worry about being fast at arithmetic since the only arithmetic you'll be doing will be 
in the context of plugging things into your equations and finding results (which itself is often only in the context of debugging,
since you ultimately want the computer to be doing all your tedious minute arithmetical computations once you give it the formulae).

Let me just say that deciding to take the time to study linear algebra has truly opened my eyes. I was able to do away with the
entire Angle class as well as cut away a lot of code from the vector class and the simple rotation methods and still have 
rotations work beautifully. (See : Vector_Rotator_2D, one of the best classes I wrote for this project, really refined my methods
and called attention to things like where double-int conversions should occur).
Not only that, but such ideas as span and the basis for a vector space have really furthered my 
understanding of 2 and 3 dimensional space, and to an extent, mathematics and life in general (because we live in 3-space). 

Ironically, going into this project I hadn't realized that DOOM, the iconic, controversial first person shooter developed by id
Software in 1993, is not actually a 3D game; that is, the environment itself may have a Z-dimension-like element corresponding to
for example the height of walls and elevated surfaces, but the camera and the ways in which the player object is allowed to move
and shoot correspond with a top-down, 2D shooter. I found this funny, because one of the huge motivators for my undertaking this
massive project and learning all the math it has entailed was to create an FPS DOOM-clone (imitation is the sincerest form of
flattery), but then I realized that I didn't actually need all the math I'd been learning to do that. Regardless, understanding just
how easy creating a DOOM-clone would be given what I already knew, I started writing DOOM18.java, in addition to continuing work on 
an actual 3D rendering system. (See : DOOM18 - About.txt , DOOM18.java)

There's one last thing I'd like to touch upon before continuing my discussion of Kermo proper. 
Late one night, I started rewriting both KermoEngine3D and DOOM18, separating everything into classes with public and 
private methods and data, not having everything be static. I was able to 
express much of what I'd learned theretofore by rewriting things like the Vector and Camera classes from memory, and refined my 
methods and thinking by for example calling what I'd called "Sprites" and "Textures" instead "Images". 
I also started thinking about some of the other things I'd need, like 
Items and Guns and Animator objects, while putting many of my math methods into a Methods class and separating out my GUI classes, putting some elements into Main.  
I started to see how you can pull different discrete objects, each themselves tools and simple machines, together into a coherent software machine, working with and fine-tuning each independently while also building up the whole interdependent system; what that feels like, how easy and exciting that can be. 
This marked the change from Stage 0 to Stage 1 of the development of Kermo and DOOM18, and perhaps the next level of my programming experience.

I also began to really see from doing this that KermoEngine3D and DOOM18 are in many ways essentially the same app, with one 
simply extended from R^2 to R^3, and each having a small set of provisions and quirks pertaining to the dimension of their 
vector space. DOOM18 has some esoteric logic, particularly for how the camera emulates 3D in drawing the world to frame, that make it
somewhat even more complex and less elegant of an app than the fully 3D rendering system.

That the findIntersection logic for a line and a plane in 3D, and two lines in 2D, is in fact identical to the very 
letter of code, served greatly to reinforce this understanding ( See : DOOM18 - Line Intersection in 2D.txt, Kermo - Intersection of a Line and a Plane.txt).

Now: What I did start with, when I endeavored to start writing a graphics engine from scratch so long ago, aside from the Java I'd 
learned from taking 2 introductory compsci courses at Harvard Extension (Dr. Henry Leitner), a belief in the beauty and power of 
Video Games, and the vague prevailing notion that it was all so tantalizingly possible (even way back then, I knew that it was 
possible), were 2 basic ideas ...



2. THE FIRST IDEA : RASTER RENDERING

“A pixel is not a little square!” —Alvy Ray Smith 

The first idea was that of the raster-display, the rectangular array of tiny triplets of LED's called pixels. Each sub-pixel is
tinted either red, blue, or green and emits a light the intensity of which is an analog of a signal that is converted from a digitally ecnoded number sent across a bus from the controller of the monitor/phone/tv/watch/any device with an LED display. The device stores the 3 values for each pixel in memory, usually allotting 8 bits for each (Java in particular supports 
8-bit color values, from 0-255 which is 2^8 or 256 possible values; 256^3 = 16.8 million possible color combinations), and each 
24bit color number is stored in a rectangular array in memory, indexed corresponding to the X and Y position of the pixel to be 
colored. Each number is then accessed sequencially within the array, sent across a bus to the pixel in question, and converted into 
an analog voltage that is sent through the LED, burning the material within and causing energy to be released as light, thus 
illuminating the pixel to a brightness that is an analog of the input voltage. I don't know many of the specifics of the process as 
I'm not an electrical engineer or even really a hardware guy at all, but this is a generally accurate picture of what's going on. 

I didn't necessarily know all of that starting out but I did understand the following: the computer draws images by coloring pixels in a 2d array, from a 2d array of values in memory. *

So, using arrays and the Java swing package, I overloaded the paintComponent method for a JPanel that would serve as a display
(sort of like a tv screen or monitor emulator), in the following manner:


	static Color [][] Frame = new Color[height][width]	    // the virtual image within memory

	static class ViewPort extends JPanel
	{
		public void paintComponent(Graphics g)
			for (int y = 0; y < height; ++y)     	    // a raster-renderer that proceeds along each pixel    
                		for (int x = 0; x < width; ++x)     // up to down, left to right   
                		{
                    			g.setColor(Frame[y][x]);    // get the color of the virtual image at that position

                    			g.drawRect(x, y, 1, 1);     // color each singular pixel by drawing a rectangle with
								    // width and height 0 at each pixel location on the screen                        
                		}
	}

See : Display.java



3. THE SECOND IDEA : CARTESIAN WORLD

So, now that we know how the computer colors pixels, the essential problem of 3D graphics is formulated: how does the computer 
obtain the color for each pixel? This is where my other idea comes into play. If you look at video games, the objects in a video
game are numeric representations stored in memory, which occupy a 3-dimensional Cartesian coordinate space comprised of an array
of discrete points or ordered tuples (also in memory), themselves comprised of three values corresponding to the X, Y and Z positions
of the point in the space; in other words, I pictured the game world as a numeric box or grid, with objects in the box occupying 
coordinates in it. Each point would have a color value assigned to it, just as objects in the world would have colors, and then the 
camera would undergo a process for mathematically obtaining the colors of certain points within the world, and use those colors to 
color the frame. From this I developed the following code (from a very early, deprecated version of the engine) :


static class World		
{
	static Point [][][] Points = new Point[worldSize][worldSize][worldSize];     // the world would be a giant cube
	World()
	{
		for (int z = 0; z < worldSize; ++z)
			for (int y = 0; y < worldSize; ++y)
				for (int x = 0; x < worldSize; ++x)
					Points[z][y][z] = new Point(x,y,z);	
							// where each Point is an object containing
							// ints for its x, y, and z coordinates
	}

As you can see, I used a for-loop as a sort of raster-initializer for the World object, proceeding along each slot along the
Z, Y, and X axes and populating the world with a Point at each position (fun fact: I used to be obsessed, like seriously obsessed
with for-loops *). So, what's wrong with the World class? Well, in order for the world to be big enough, which is to say have enough coordinate values within it to enable a high precision of computation and thus a highly detailed world, there needed to be on the order of 1000s, 10s of thousands or more, points along each axis; in fact, I had initially planned for there to be 1million^3 points within the world. Let's do the math: each point object has as its data fields 3 integers for X,Y, and Z, and a Color value (not to mention
potentially other fields such as for example a double value distanceFromOrigin representing the distance of the point from the 
Camera origin, which would be a hugely important value to keep track of, or things like links to polygons if it were a vertex of
a polygon; I ended up making a Vertex class that extended the Point class, but that was later). Each int has 4bytes, and each
Color object has (at least) 3 bytes (for representing 3 integers from 0-255); that's 7 bytes per point, times 1000000000 (not cubed)
= 7 gigabytes of RAM consumed to create the world (then you'd have to cube that).  Yeah, on a machine that has only 2gb of RAM
(not to mention a whimpy 1.2ghz processor and only 20gb of storage with no gpu and not many other features to speak of; it's 
probably the crappiest excuse for a notebook you could ever imagine using for anything, let alone trying to build a complete 
3d graphics engine emulator or some of the other projects I've tried to build and run on it; although
it never overheated in 90+ degree weather spending hours in a densely packed homeless backpack), you'd better believe I got a 
"stack overflow" error message and had to reexamine my methods. 

(Shit, that shit wouldn't run on the most tricked-out gaming pc, you'd need a supercomputer to run that)
(Not that the pc I had to scrap before moving out of my parents house to become homeless when they sold it was tricked out by any
 stretch of the imagination, but hey at least it ran Unity and Unreal; but I digress)

Of course, the solution to this problem is that you don't actually need to have a world class with a bunch of points, most of which
would be empty if they weren't coindexed to the polygons containing them. Instead, you can just have the polygons themselves, with
values floating around in space for vertex coordinates and colors and orientations and the like; then, you can loop through them
during rendering.

		
4. THE "VIEW FRUSTRUM"

5. RAY-TRACING
 
Now we come to what I believe to be a beautiful engineering solution, and one of the great ideas within computer science:
Ray-Tracing.


